# 4. Using Bitcoin in practice

We have talked a lot about the Bitcoin software and its users and so on, but it has all been totally hypothetical and removed from the real world. Let's discuss how people use it on a day-to-day basis

You may know a guy who told you he owns Bitcoin, or that he bought something with Bitcoin. Where did he get it from? How does he spend it? 

This can be kind of confusing because there are a bunch of different ways to own or spend Bitcoin, and the word "wallet" is used to describe most of them, despite referring to completely different things (software in one case, a piece of paper in another, for example).

#### Bitcoin banks

If the guy you know is in the US, he probably got his Bitcoin on Coinbase, a very user-friendly website where you can exchange US dollars for Bitcoin. Once you own Bitcoin, you can send it to any address you wish or exchange it for a few other different types of cryptocurrency on the platform, or convert if back into dollars if you regret your purchase.

You can also just keep it there forever and use Coinbase as your "wallet" to buy things and receive payments, which if you are storing any substantial sum of money is a bad idea. This is basically just using a bank. If your Bitcoin is on Coinbase, you do not actually own the private key or run the Bitcoin software, and nothing we talked about in the entire first three sections applies. Coinbase is running the Bitcoin software on their own server to process all of the transactions you make on it, and they are likely storing your Bitcoin in one enormous account mixed in with everyone else's. You are totally putting your trust in Coinbase to not just run away with your Bitcoin or block your payments. But it's much worse than traditional banking because you are not getting any security out of it, since crypto exchanges are a ripe, ripe target for hackers. Hacks of millions of dollars in cryptocurrencies happen all the time on exchanges and usually you are not going to see any of that money back. Coinbase is a fairly well-vetted company and is unlikely to just completely run off with your money, but this has happened numerous times with other, shadier exchanges. Some insane stories have made the news: recently, the CEO of QuadrigaCX, Canada's largest cryptocurrency exchange, appears to have moved to India and faked his own death in order to shut down the exchange and steal $40M in his customers' money. Crypto is a shady world and full of remorseless scammers looking for their next kill - don't let yourself be it! 

To spend and receive Bitcoin in a trustless way, you will need to download a Bitcoin client. The official software is called Bitcoin Core. Before Satoshi Nakamoto (the mysterious inventor of Bitcoin) disppeared from the internet never to be heard from again, he hand-picked successors for further development of his software, similar to Christ choosing Peter to lead the Catholic Church before he ascended into heaven. (Blockchain, the 21st century version of religion?) This lineage is now known as Bitcoin Core. However, anyone is free to develop and share their own alternative Bitcoin client if they disagree with something Bitcoin Core is doing or simply feel like making their own.

Bitcoin Core is open-source software, which means you can read the code yourself. Most software is not open-source, because software is usually developed for profit. Open-source software is difficult to sell because if the code is freely available people can just copy it and use it themselves without paying. Or they could make some quick changes and sell their version as a competitor. However, some people work hard, often for free, on creating open-source software because they believe it's to the benefit of humanity to have tools that are freely available and not just for the profit of a specific company. Sometimes they will be able to get grants from charitable foundations to do this. 

Cryptocurrency software pretty much has to be open-source, because otherwise it isn't trustless. If you can't read the code of your Bitcoin client, you would have no way of knowing it's not storing your private keys on a database somewhere and handing them over to the developers so they can take all your money! There are many competing open-source Bitcoin clients - I don't know if there are any closed source ones. If you see a client available that doesn't publish its code, this is an enormous red flag and you should not use it. 

#### Different ways to store and spend your Bitcoin

The Bitcoin Core software is what we call a "full node", which means when you run the software, after it starts connecting to other users on the network it will download, verify, and store on your computer the blockchain (the entire history of transactions thus far). This is a major problem for most users because the blockchain at this point is over 150 GB. For almost everyone, this means that you are going to need a dedicated machine just to run a Bitcoin full node. 

If you don't want to run a full node or buy a hardware wallet, you can download what's called a "light client", "light node", or "SPV client" (Simplified Payment Verification). This is a version of the Bitcoin software that doesn't store or validate the database, but rather has to ask someone else who is running a full node whenever it wants to know something about the state of the network. This is much better than using something like Coinbase where we don't own our own private keys, but it's still not a trustless solution because we need to rely on someone else to supply us with all the data we need. We won't even know, for example, how much Bitcoin we own until we ask someone else to tell us. Using a light client isn't a security issue in the sense that it enables anyone to steal your private key and therefore your Bitcoin, but it could allow people to defraud you since you can't be 100% sure that any payments to you have actually taken place, given that you can't read the blockchain. It's possible for fraudsters to mess with your network connection so that you think you're recieving valid data from full nodes indicating that you have been paid, but really you are just recieving lies from the person who is trying to buy your goods or services without legitimately paying. 

You can also find light nodes that run on the web or on your phone, which for most users is much more convenient than installing desktop software. However neither of these approaches can truly be secure. When you're using a web client, you could review the code in the website to make sure it's not sending your private keys to a server somewhere, but you would have to review it every single time you use it because they could have changed the website since the last time you checked it. With a mobile client, even if the software developer publishes their code somewhere, you can't download that code and build the software yourself on your iPhone - you have to go through the App Store, which means that you need to trust some combination of the developers and Apple/Google. 

Whether running a full node or a light node, a problem with computers is that they can always be hacked. If someone manages to install some sort of malware on your computer, they could potentially steal your private keys. For this reason, it's usually recommended to only store large sums of Bitcoin in "cold storage", which means not storing them in a client that's connected to the internet. 

This is easy, because all you need to do to "store" a sum of Bitcoin is to have access to the private key which owns it. So one form of "cold storage" is just writing down the private key on a piece of paper - this is called a "paper wallet". Ideally you would probably put this in a safe deposit box or something rather than, say, pinned to your refrigerator. Another form of cold storage is storing the private keys (perhaps encrypted with a password) on a hard drive not connected to the internet. 

Given the various tradeoffs involved with all these approaches, anyone who is storing and using a lot of Bitcoin is probably going to have multiple different means of storing their Bitcoin depending on how quickly they need to access the funds. Right now, as a user of the dollar, you might have, say, a few hundred dollars in cash in your wallet, a few thousand dollars in your checking account for less frequent, larger purchases, and tens or hundreds of thousands out of access and safe in your savings account. 

It's logical to do something similar to this with your Bitcoin. You can keep .1 Bitcoin (about $300 today) in something like Coinbase or a mobile client for quick payments. Then keep 1 Bitcoin in a desktop client for larger payments, probably a full node if you're receiving large payments you need to verify. And then keep most of your stash of Bitcoin secure in cold storage.

There are even more options I didn't go into here, like a hardware wallet -  a light client on a USB stick that keeps your keys as secure as possible by isolating them in a piece of silicon from which they cannot be extracted, and the Lightning network, a new service that allows for faster transactions by letting you open a sort of "bar tab" of transactions that you don't have to record on the blockchain until it's closed. Lots to talk about but this is long enough already!

#### Mining in practice 

What if you want to make a little bit of money on the side by mining Bitcoin? 

The answer is, unless you live in the Pearl River Delta region of China and have enormous amounts of capital to invest, you can't. It has not been possible to make any money mining Bitcoin on consumer hardware for quite some time. This is because miners, seeking to make as much money as possible, have invented types of computers that mine Bitcoin around 1000x faster than, say, your MacBook could. These computers are known as ASICs, or application-specific-integrated-circuits. They are extremely fast at mining Bitcoin because they are designed to do specifically that - in fact, they can do nothing else. It is as if they have programmed the hash function that mines Bitcoin physically in silicon on a computer chip rather than in software. 

Also, they rely on economies of scale to reduce the cost of electricity and cooling for a given computer, meaning that you need hundreds or thousands of these specialized computers side-by-side in a "mining farm" to profit nicely. For various economic reasons relating to availability of cheap electricity, all of these mining farms are located in a specific region of China. 

Is this a problem? Probably, yes. Bitcoin mining is very centralized in practice today. The current situation is nothing like how it was originally envisioned. 

There is not too much risk of one of these powerful miners trying to double-spend, since this would crash the price of Bitcoin and make their business unprofitable, but the Chinese government is a concern. Bitcoin mining being entirely located in one country is a risk, and China might be a particularly bad one for it to be in, since they are an authoritarian state that has the ability to take over powerful businesses should they choose to. Several alternatives to Bitcoin, such as Ethereum and Monero, have taken steps to neutralize ASICs and make consumer mining profitable again, but as far as I know of, no one is really advocating for Bitcoin itself to take steps in this direction.
